Add Java 22 blog post (#633)
trinodb/trino.io: _posts/2024-03-11-java-22.md

---
layout: post
title: "Blazing ahead with 22"
author: "Manfred Moser, Martin Traverso, Dain Sundstrom, David Phillips"
excerpt_separator: <!--more-->
image: /assets/images/logos/java-duke-22.png
show_pagenav: true
---

> It really has not been that long ago that we [first announced support for Java

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It was not that long ago that we [first announced support for Java
```

> 21]({% post_url 2023-11-03-java-21 %}), and subsequently made is a build and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
21]({% post_url 2023-11-03-java-21 %}), and subsequently made it a build and
```

runtime requirement with [Trino 436]({{site.url}}docs/current/release/release-436.html). 

> Since then the codebase received some significant improvements in readability,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Since then, the codebase received some significant improvements in readability,
```

and we have also seen better performance. However, innovation in Trino and Java

> is not holding still, on the contrary its accelerating. On the Java commmunity

Reviewer: ```suggestion
is not holding still, on the contrary - it's accelerating. On the Java commmunity
```

side, Java 22 is just about to be released, and we think it is time to drive

> innovation in Trino even further.

Reviewer: I think in general, you should say in your intro paragraphs very explicitly that Trino is moving to Java 22.

Author: Done

<!--more-->

## Background and motivation

The planned move to use and require Java 22 for build and runtime of Trino is
driven by numerous aspects:

* Take advantage of performance and runtime improvements of the new JVM version.
* Use the newly available language features to further improve readability and

>   maintainenace aspects of the codebase.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  maintenance aspects of the codebase.
```

* Enable the use of further performance improvments for Trino under the umbrella
  of [Project Hummingbird](https://github.com/trinodb/trino/issues/14237).
* Attract and motivate more contributors for Trino as an opportunity to work

>   with a modern Java stack on a current edge, complex application and work with

Reviewer: Current edge or cutting edge?

Author: cutting ..

  the relevant language features and APIs.

Speaking about APIs and new features, let's look at a list of JDK Enhancement

> Proposals (JEPs) that we are actively looking at. Specifically we plan to experiment, and adopt any non-preview JEPs where we see benefits. We also plan to submit any issues and problems we encounter back upstream to the Java community:

Reviewer: Line break needed I think

Author: done

* Region Pinning for G1 ([JEP 423](https://openjdk.org/jeps/423))
* Foreign Function & Memory API ([JEP 454](https://openjdk.org/jeps/454))
* Unnamed Variables and Patterns ([JEP 456](https://openjdk.org/jeps/456))
* Class File API([JEP 457](https://openjdk.org/jeps/457))
* String Templates ([JEP 459](https://openjdk.org/jeps/459))
* Vector API ([JEP 460](https://openjdk.org/jeps/460))
* Structured Concurrency ([JEP 462](https://openjdk.org/jeps/462))
* Scoped Values ([JEP 464](https://openjdk.org/jeps/464))

> Many of these API's allow us to further modernize feature set of Trino and adapt

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Many of these API's allow us to further modernize the feature set of Trino and adapt
```

it to current hardware and compute power realtities. Specifically we can
continue with our commitment to the Java ecosystem and avoid mamy of the
complexities and pitfalls of traditional, now legacy integrations with native
code and specific hardware systems.

Another aspect some of you might wonder about is the move from a Java LTS
version to a Java STS release. From "long term support" to "short term support".
So far Trino was using Java 8, Java 11, Java 17, and then Java 21 as
requirements. Since all of them are LTS releases, some of you might have
concluded that we have a policy of only using Java LTS version. That is not the
case, but a concidence. We always thrived use up to date source code,
dependencies, runtime environments, and so forth. The benefits, including better
performance, available and included bug fixes, reduced need for backports, less
security issues, and support for modern development environments and tooling,
always far outweighed the benefits of "support". Specifically for an open source

> project the term of "support" is often meaningless anyway since there is nobody

Reviewer: ```suggestion
project the term of "support" is often meaningless anyway, since there is nobody
```
